

## MINERS and ROLE OF MINERS
------------------------------------------

Miners are an integral part of the bitcoin ecosystem who ensure fairness and keep the network stable, safe and secure by approving transactions.

Miners have to provide a solution to complex Mathematical problems which is called Proof of Work.


## PROOF OF WORK
------------------------------------------

> Proof of Work is a consensus algorithm in the blockchain network that is used to confirm the transactions, using a Mathematical puzzle or a challenge, and produces a new block within the existing blockchain.

Proof of Work comprises of three main characters: 
1. Nonce
2. Hash
3. Transaction



## NONCE
------------------------------------------

Nonce: Number used Once

> It is a random number whose value is set so that the hash of the block will contain a run of leading zeros. Thus, it is the number that blockchain miners are solving for.



## HASH CODE
------------------------------------------

Hash code is a numeric value which assists in identifying an object at the time of equality testing. It also serves as an index for the object.

- The purpose of hash code is to assist in efficient lookup and insertions in data collections that are contingent on a hash table.
- Hash code is generated by taking an input and converting it to cryptographic output using Mathematical algorithms.
- hash of x is represented by H(x).
- Thus Hash code is an algorithm that converts a sequence of characters into a string of 64 letters or numbers.


## HASH POINTER
------------------------------------------

> A Hash pointer is a pointer to the location where information or hash of that information is stored.

- If we retrieve information that a pointer points at, we can get hash of the information and confirm it to be unchanged.
- It requires information of previous hash.

- Like a regular pointer, it lets us locate information. Unlike a regular pointer, it also lets us verify that the information has not been tampered.



## GENERATION OF NONCE
------------------------------------------

Step 1: https://andersbrownworth.com/blockchain/block and observe the the nonce value
Step 2: Enter some data in the data field and click on 'mine'. Observe that a new nonce and hash are generated



## GENERATION OF HASH VALUE
------------------------------------------

Step 1: Visit https://andersbrownworth.com/blockchain/hash 
Step 2: Enter some data in the data field and observe the change in the hash value.


## PROOF OF STAKE
------------------------------------------

> Proof of Stake is a low cost, low energy-consuming algorithm that states that a person can mine and validate transactions based on how many coins (cryptocurrency) s/he holds.

1. Anyone who holds the base cryptocurrency can become a validator, - although sometiimes a locked-up deposit is required.

2. A validator's chance of mining a block is based on how much stake or cryptocurrency they have. 

For example, if you owned 1% of the cryptocurrency, you would be able to mine 1% of all its transactions.


3. The Proof of Stake protocol will randomly assign the right to create a block between selected validators based upon the value created by their stakes. The chosen validator will be rewarded with a part of or the whole of the transaction fees.



## PROOF OF ELAPSED TIME
------------------------------------------

> Proof of Elapsed Time is a consensus algorithm that prevents high energy consumption and resourse utilization by following lottery system.

Each participant in the network is required to wait for a randomly chosen time period. The one who completes the designated waiting time wins the new block.



## PRACTICAL BYZANTINE FAULT TOLERANCE (PBFT)
------------------------------------------

> Practical Byzantine Faut Tolerance (PBFT) improves the robustness and performance of transactions by directing peer-to-peer messages with minimal latency.

- The blockchain operator configures and operates the blockchain network
- To this network, smart contracts are deployed and executed on peer nodes
- The applications are then used to invoke the smart contracts
- Though the exact network structure depends on the consensus mechanism, PBFT has a leader, validating and non-validating peers.
- Consensus messages flow between the appropriate peers to ensure that the blockchain's smart contract transactions are kept in order



## BLOCKCHAIN BLOCK STRUCTURE
------------------------------------------

A block comprises of 3 parts:

1. *Header* - contains version information, nonce, previous block ID, and timestamp
2. *Merkle* - hash built from block's transaction identifiers
3. *Transaction List* - contains identification of hashes included in the block's merkle tree


## BLOCKCHAIN IDENTIFIERS
------------------------------------------

1. Block Header
2. Block Heigth

>Block Header is a primary identifier of a block. It is the digital fingerprint twice the size of the block. It serves as a unique identification for a block, and has 32 byte hash.

> Block Height is the position of a block in a blockchain. 

The first block, called the *Genesis Block*, is of height 0. Each node dynamically identifies a block, thus height of a block is comsidered the number of blocks that the chain has between itself and the Genesis block. The height of a blockchain is generally taken to be the height of its highest block in a chain with the maximum total dificulty, which is the lenght of chain minus 1.


## BLOCKCHAIN MERKLE TREE
------------------------------------------

> Blockchain Merkle Tree is a data structure used for summarizing and verifying the integrity of large sets of data. It is also known as a binary hash tree.

Merkle Root



## MERKLE ROOT
------------------------------------------




## ADVANTAGES OF A MERKLE TREE
------------------------------------------

1. Merkle tree provides a way of proving integrity of the data.
2. Menmory or the disk space required is very low.
3. The proofs in a merkkle Tree is computed quickkly and easily.
4. Merkkle Trees also provide validation of the data.
5. Merkle Roots require very less information to be transmitted across the network.



## FEATURES OF BLOCKCHAIN: 4. DISTRIBUTED LEDGER
------------------------------------------

> A distributed ledger can be defined as a concensus of shared, replicated and synchronized data in digital format which is geographically spread across the globe. It has no central administartor or single data storage point.




